it has to be destined and welcome back
to smarter every day we've all heard
about solar eclipses right and you're
probably aware that there's a huge one
coming very soon so you think about how
to prepare you're thinking maybe I got
to get some special goggles so that when
I'm looking up at the sky and I see the
moon come across I don't hurt my eyes so
I can see totality by looking directly
at the Sun or something like that right
it's actually far more complicated and
far more beautiful than that there are
very specific moments that happen during
the solar eclipse that if you're
prepared for them down to the second you
can see really neat things that you
didn't know about before so today on
smarter every day there's this hyper
meticulous guy in my hometown when I say
meticulous just look at what he does for
a living anyway this guy has chased
eclipses all over the world it Clips
these I don't know anyway this guy is
like having a meeting right now with all
his buddies they're going to plan down
to the second where they're going to be
so they can see these individual events
not just totality but there's other
stuff that happens anyway let's go bust
up in here and let's figure out to
scientifically watch an eclipse let's go
can I post up your meeting and ask a
question yes sir
this is dr. Gordon telephone he's a
well-respected plastic surgeon by day
known for great attention to detail so
why are you guys here listening to this
guy he's a man I'm here because he's
known as an eclipse fanatic he's
traveled the world to film eclipses and
he's even been invited to give talks at
NASA after the meeting I told dr.
telephone I wanted to go to my son's
baseball game so he agreed to meet with
me the following day in this conference
room by the way my oldest son found his
baseball swing this year and I loved to
watch him play I came back the next day
for a one-on-one eclipse study session
with dr. telephone I've got a good show
for you so I guess the ultimate goal is
to try to prepare people for this
eclipse and to inspire them not to miss
it this clips is going to be a
once-in-a-lifetime thing for a lot of
people people not going to travel all
over the world to go to eclipses like I
did it's a wonderful thing to have an
eclipse in your country that you can
drive to and when I show you the world
maps of the eclipses that are going to
happen over the next 20 years you'll
understand how difficult it is to get to
a total solar eclipse of the Sun he
started with the basics he first
explained how magical it is that our
Moon
are almost exactly the same size in the
sky even though they're very different
celestial bodies the moon orbits the
earth in an ellipse this means that as
it gets closer to us it looks bigger and
as it gets farther away from us it looks
smaller the really cool thing about this
is that at the smallest size it doesn't
quite cover the Sun but at the largest
size it does this means that there's two
major types of eclipses and annular
eclipse occurs when the moon doesn't
totally block out the Sun it looks like
a bright glowing solar disc poking out
from behind the moon when the moon is
larger it does block out the Sun this of
course is a total eclipse eclipses are
few and far between with only a few
hitting each continent over the course
of several decades the red curves here
show annular eclipses where the moon is
smaller than the Sun so as you can
imagine the total eclipses which are
shown here in blue are extra special
sweep if one of these is in the country
where you live you really need to figure
out how to drive to it these narrow
bands where they clips shadow moves over
the ground is called the totality plane
you have to be within the band to see a
total eclipse but it's not just OK to
get within the band your goal should be
to get to the very center of the band at
the edges that totality only lasts a few
seconds but down in the center it can
last several minutes
Gordon explained that the most important
thing about wherever you're watching the
Eclipse from is called the contact times
c1 or contact time 1 is the exact
instant when the lunar disk touches the
solar disk in the sky the moon then
continues to move across the Sun for
quite some time this can usually take
over an hour then c2 happens c2 is the
exact second that the lunar disk covers
the Sun c3 is the moment that the Sun
pokes out from behind the moon again it
then traverses for probably an hour or
so and then c4 happens c4 is the exact
moment that the moon quits covering the
Sun at all what I'm telling people to do
is not miss the partial phase phenomenon
which are the other things that happen
before
totality your surroundings change the
temperature changes the lighting changes
the animals get confused because they
think nighttime is falling and if you're
really lucky you'll get to see shadow
bands
vans don't have it happened at every
eclipse and they don't happen at every
observing area what order shadow bands
it bends the light and causes motions of
serpentine shadows across the ground
that look like thousands of snakes
crawling in unison shut in parallel this
is going away from you away that and to
the side it's unbelievable I saw him in
2002 no absolutely
you're saying you're saying it's going
to it might look like snakes are
crawling on the ground very faint
because their little gray shadows and
the way I perceive them is picture
thousands of parallel snakes going like
this going away from you and to one of
the sides depending on what snakes I
thought an eclipse was like you know I'm
going to look at no it's about shadow
bands for me now here's the deal
in 1842 this guy was like it was so
striking that children were running
around and trying to grab these things
with their hands this is a real
phenomenon I've looked it up and
scientists do not know what causes it
they have like a ton of theories they
don't know to me this sounds like an
optical interference thing but they
don't know and there's not a good video
on the internet there's some video but
it's such a low contrast event then
nobody's captured it really well so the
obvious question for mr. solar eclipse
expert is how do we get a good video of
shadow bands how do we capture it when
does it happen just before see - just
before see - and just after C 3 when the
Sun is a slit it has to be that final
little narrow slit otherwise it doesn't
work how long does it blast for about 20
or 30 seconds you you have to catch it
so you have to know it's about to happen
exactly I rarely ask people to do things
on smartereveryday videos but we have to
catch video of shadow vans that has to
happen I think it's in Ferrari I'm not
sure so the way to do it is set up a
video camera on a manual exposure on a
king-sized white sheet
or like light concrete or like hungry to
go okay the next thing is called the
diamond ring the diamond ring is the
part just before see to where it
actually looks like a diamond ring if
you're taking photograph of the Sun what
happens immediately after that is
fascinating it's called Baily's beads
now Baily's beads is when the lunar disk
is right about to cover the top of the
solar disk what's really cool is that it
should be just a really skinny Crescent
all the way around right but the fact is
the moon has valleys and mountains and
those start to close over the solar disk
and you can see the light coming around
those mountains it's really cool it's
breaking that solar light up in the
beads
it's called Baily's beads anyway you
have to know the exact second that
happens because it's such a fast
phenomenon you have to be taking photos
like at that instant in order to catch
it so in 2001 I programmed I paid a
programmer to program the first Eclipse
talking timer this is from 2002 and I
still have one that works Wow so you so
you made this back then that's right so
there's the original talking timer you
from 2002 you made it okay I don't know
what's more impressive that you made
this in 2002 or that you have one of
these things that still work okay you
know all the words it's time to plan out
the day of the solar eclipse step one
and get to the totality plane preferably
in the center of the totality plane at
that point you're going to wait for the
lunar disk to touch the solar disk
that's C one game on at that point
weird stuff starts to go down the
temperature starts to decrease animals
start to freak out because it's getting
dark to think it's about to be night
anyway all that happens over an extended
period of time well over an hour after
that we're approaching c2 and that's
where things get crazy the three
phenomena that you're going to look out
for number one
shadow bands I've already figured out
I'm going to use a big old piece of
white plastic to try to see the shadow
bands I'm excited about that the second
one the diamond ring that's about five
seconds before c2 immediately after that
if you're a good photographer you're
going to catch Baily's beads I'm going
for it
a BAM see two heads after see two that's
when you're in totality you can remove
your glasses and you can look directly
at the Sun at that point somewhere in
there is max totality I'm told to scan
the horizon because it looks like a
360-degree sunrise after that right
before c3 gets your glasses back on
because the sun's about to pop out and
you don't want to hurt your eyes
immediately after c3 first you've got
the Baily's beads and then you have the
diamond ring and then again if you're
lucky for 60 seconds after that there's
a possibility of shadow bands after that
we're moving towards c4 the temperatures
coming back up everything is going to be
awesome except it's going to be over the
cool thing about it is you have to note
exactly when it's going to happen
because you get one shot at seeing all
this stuff back in the day you had to
send a self-addressed stamped envelope
to Goddard Space Flight Center these are
Gordon's he was like deals didn't want
to let me borrow him because they're so
valuable to him anyway the way it worked
is you've got these solar eclipse
bulletins and you had to calculate the
exact moment by interpolation when your
contact times were for wherever you were
on the globe it was very very cumbersome
however we have good news we live in the
age of smartphones and we also have a
plastic surgeon in Alabama who decided
to create an app so that you can take
your phone out geo locate wherever you
are and instantly calculate your contact
times for your position and that's
flippin awesome which is why I asked him
if it was real and if it was going to
work and if he could go with me to
Tennessee where the totality plane
exists and test the contact times inside
and outside of the totality plane
remember you want to get to the center I
wanted to test his app on the edge check
it out okay we are in the parking lot of
a church in Brentwood Tennessee whereas
we're on this sidewalk right here yep so
this sidewalk is in totality that tree
over there where that sign is is not
intuitive okay so I'm going to try this
so I got the app here solar eclipse
timer app so I'm going to get my
location right and then we're in
that's my location right there right let
it
longitude and for contact times C 1 C 2
C 3 C 4 ok load my contact times and so
I have a 6 second duration totality
right here correct
does that make sense to you yes it
probably would be a little bit shorter
that's my call on me all right could be
a little bit shorter yeah because we
need to turn that off the day of you
don't want people calling you during the
day I have that in the instructions ok
18 minutes shut off test texting and
phone receiver okay that's like a really
good point okay so let's go to where
it's not in totality right so we're
right here and we were able to pick it
up okay so we should go like it to that
tree and we should just get partially
okay let's do it so seriously like right
here load my times get my location look
at that
I've got c1 and I've got c4 I have no c2
and c3 I'm not in the totality plane
that's correct we just walked across a
parking lot and this told us if we're
going to see the Eclipse or not that's
exactly right
how long have you worked on this I have
worked on this since last August and
I've tested in this parking lot about
six times prior to today really yes
are you excited that it where I am I'm
not very impressed going now so what
what's it now here no wait so solar
eclipse timer yes that's that's what you
get in the app store no usually think
I'm trying to sell as app he's just like
so into that go ahead what you see this
is a six and it's actually not is okay I
came back into the car to review the
footage the man has spent a lot of his
time making this app so that you can
watch the Eclipse and he's testing it
it's a really big deal so if you want
this you can go to the App Store and
it's solar eclipse timer and it talks to
you as the Eclipse goes to tell you C 1
C 2 C 3 and C 4 it's pretty big deal
it's 9 seconds over there is it yes ok
seriously I love this man
ok that's so good all right yeah
the moon sheet the gap right there
alright I hope you enjoyed this episode
of smarter every day I'm doing our
yearly tradition with my daughter where
we go out and we watch fireworks in our
kayaks but I want to say thank you to
the sponsor this time which is 23 in me
if you never heard of 23andme the term
23 comes from the fact that we humans
have 23 pairs of chromosomes it looks
like a good place to back up sweetheart
now this is not a sequencing service
this is a genotyping service now there's
a difference a genotype is like looking
for a word in your DNA sequence that
will show you if you're genetically
predisposed to certain things I hear the
fireworks
alright so real quick if you want to do
this test which I highly recommend
because it's really cool it's pretty
simple you just open the box when they
send it to you there's a little test kit
in there all you have to do is spit in
this little thing a pickax do this right
here in the Chi oh yeah check it out you
take this and you spit in it you fill it
up to the line with your spit and
there's a basically a stabilizer liquid
stabilizer in there you fold it over and
then you seal it up and Mail it off
anyway all kinds of information like
your ancestry you get if you're
genetically predisposed to certain types
of health issues it's a really neat
service so if you want to check it out
please go to 23andme comm slash smarter
and check it out that will support
smarter every day and it will also help
you learn more about your ancestry and
your own body it's pretty cool and it is
time to look at fireworks
[Music]
you'll know support smarter every day
please go to 23andme calm slash the
smarter and check it out this is
hilarious finale - video
[Music]
I know your turbosmart do your homework
get the glasses that are approved for
direct solar viewing because if you get
the wrong kind they could actually open
your pupils up more and let harmful UV
in so get the right kind and then do
your homework know when you can take
them off and look directly at the total
solar eclipse and more importantly know
when to put them back on before the Sun
pops back out and get you at sea 3
thanks again to 23andme for supporting
this episode of smarter every day and
thank you for watching it I hope you
learned something here because I've
learned a lot these are my favorite
videos where I don't know what's going
on until I just start asking the expert
I love these videos anyway if you
enjoyed this in added value to your life
please consider subscribing only if I
earned it if not no big deal totally get
it it's the Internet do whatever you
want also I have some other stuff on
smarter every day - I've got a little
background description on how to use
your camera to video the Eclipse Gordon
has a thing called the drift method I'll
put that on smarter every day - also the
conference tape will talk I'll put that
over there - I really appreciate you and
I really want video of shadow bands
anyway I'm Destin getting smarter every
day have a good one